import { YouTube } from "@/components/youtube";

![Redshift Logo](/projects/redshift/redshift_logo.png)

I founded Redshift after falling in love with a few other games in the genre.
Quake Live, Unreal Tournament and Uberstrike all influenced the GDD in some way
or other.

Redshift is a re-imagined arena-shooter that lets you choose the pace you want
to play! It revitalises the genre by introducing unique design and new intuitive
weapons. Redshift has a fun levelling system, competitive ladders, tons of
skinned items, and an active, caring development team!

<YouTube id="RZodemetqLg" />

## Realtime friends, messaging and lobby

Among other things, I took on the responsibility of creating the back-end for
the game. This included a user system based around JWT with role based access to
API endpoints. This allows game administrators to ban, mute and kick players
easily via a web based administration panel. The friend system allows users to
add/remove friends and communicate in real time. It also relays user status
allowing friends to join their current game. All this can be seen in the video
below.

The games network architecture is based around a semi-authorititive approach.
Weapon rate of fire checks and player stats are all done on the server. This is
of course not as effective as a fully authorititive approach though for the sake
of practicality (COST) it works quite well. Other anti-cheat measures are also
in place client-side.

## Game Mechanics

The strafing mechanic also known as bunnyhopping is adopted by games such as
Quake, CSGO and Unreal tournament. An example approach is as shown here,
[Bunnyhopping from the Programmer's Perspective](http://adrianb.io/2015/02/14/bunnyhop.html).
It should be noted that the issue with other arena shooters is that strafing can
become very difficult to learn for new players. My aim was to eliminate this
learning curve and make it simple, yet with the ability for players to master. I
developed a character controller that implements this strafing mechanic, and
have recently re-worked it to support a more server authorititve approach.

The in-game shop allows users to purchase new weapons and update their loadouts.
A player can equip a total of three weapons, excluding the default melee. These
are machine gun, shotgun and sniper. A player cannot equip more than one class
of weapon. The shop automatically pulls in data from the CMS (Prismic). This
allows us to quickly add new weapons to the shop when they are ready.
